have the laws of war been breached in
Gaza the killing of civilians and
Collective punishment raises concerns as
Israel bombs the strip so who will hold
those responsible to account this is
inside
[Music]
story hello there I'm James Bay Israel's
devastating air strikes and blockade of
Gaza after the surprise attack by Hamas
have led to both sides being accused of
violating International humanitarian law
a un commission says it's collecting
evidence of war crimes allegedly
committed by Israel and Hamas Israel
says it's observing international law
the international criminal court can
launch an investigation to determine
whether casualties in Gaza and Israel
are a violation but Israel doesn't
recognize the ic's jurisdiction
for nine consecutive days Gaza has
shaken under Relentless Israeli strikes
entire neighborhoods have been turned to
Rubble after Israel dropped thousands of
bombs these indiscriminate attacks on
civilians violate article 25 of the hay
conventions since Hamas killed 1,300
Israelis during its military offensive
nearly 10 days ago the Israeli military
has imposed a total Siege on Gaza The
Enclave was already under a Land Air and
sea blockade for 16 years Palestinians
and Aid workers say a lack of food
medicine Fuel and basic supplies has
made the situation there catastrophic
under the Fourth Geneva Convention
Israel as the occupying power is
prohibited from deporting or
transferring part of the population from
the land it occupies but last week
Israel issued an ultimatum for 1.1
million Palestinians in the northern
part of The Enclave to leave their homes
we'll go to our panel of guests in a
moment but first SE vson has this report
from the ha
with thousands of Civilian death and the
situation in Gaza escalating calls for
international Justice are growing and
all eyes are here now on the
international criminal court in the Haag
but so far the a IC has not met any
formal announcement that it will step up
its investigation into possible war
crimes committed by Israel or Hamas in
2021 the IC decided that it has
jurisdiction over the occupied
Palestinian territories even though
Israel doesn't recognize the
international criminal court numerous
cases have been filed since then
including the killing of Al jazer
reporter Shireen Abu Akay who was killed
by Israeli soldiers in 2022 but so far
no progress has been announced let alone
arrest warrants issued this is in
contrast with what happened after Russia
invaded Ukraine five days Days Later the
prosecutor announced that he will start
a former investigation and since then an
arrest warrant against President
Vladimir Putin has been issued a full
blockade of Gaza is considered a war
crime and possible genocide according to
international law experts the ICC has
denied or request for an interview step
fasm for Inside Story in the
[Music]
hake let's bring in our guests in London
we have Jeffrey Robertson founder of Dy
Street chamber and former president of
the war crimes Court in Sierra Leo
Jeffrey was appointed by the UN as
distinguished jurist member on its
Justice Council in hia we have San Zahir
human rights lawyer and legal adviser
for the Civil Society Coalition for
emergency and Arab society and in New
York we have Mark galasco he's military
adviser of the Dutch NGO pxs for Peace
Mark was in Gaza during the operation
cast LED that was the Israeli War in
2009 to investigate the conduct of War
he also in instructs war crimes
investigators at The Institute of
international criminal investigations
thank you all of you for joining us I
want to start with you Jeffrey because
the rules of law we hear all these terms
IHL International humanitarian law loac
La of arm conflict there's a Latin
phrase just in Bellow and there's a
thing that everyone I think has heard of
but no one really quite understands all
the details the Geneva conventions I'm
going to ask you Jeffrey to start our
conversation off give us the 90c verion
what are the rules of of
war the rules of law are not rules of
war the rules of War have been with us
for hundreds of years don't kill
civilians don't kill don't rush to trial
or execute enemies without Fair trial
all don't kill a prisoner who surrenders
they been rules of law for centuries in
1999 in what is called the Rome statute
the rules of law were put in Fairly
straightforward English they banned The
Taking of hostages they banned the use
of starvation as a tactic which seems to
be going on now in Gaza they protected
at all times civilians unless they got
messed up in the war so they are the
rules of War fairly clear je Jeffrey
just just to be clear are these binding
on every country and every armed
group they are binding on countries that
signed up to the international criminal
court and that's 123 countries but they
are not binding on Russia which commits
war crimes every few hours in Ukraine
they are not binding on America which
refuses to sign uh in the fear that one
day an American Soldier may be
prosecuted in the ha and they are not
binding on Israel which of course
refuses to sign so they have uh a defect
in that although we can say uh that
Israel for example Russia is committing
clearly committing a war crime Mr Putin
is committing one clearly of aggression
by invading Ukraine uh the problem of
taking anyone to court and punishing
them for that criminality and indeed
that barbaric criminality when it comes
to bombing civilians uh is limited and
only if Mr Putin or some Air Force
Commander who's bombed a a civilian
residence is captured in Sweden or in
Europe somewhere is there any Prospect
of putting them on trial so you can say
that war crimes have a catch as catch
can quality about them only if you catch
a war criminal outside his country that
will protect him uh can
war crimes be punished so San if I can
come to you as we move to the specific
region of the world we're talking about
Israel and Palestine this very very long
conflict there's an important thing I
think before we talked about the details
we' heard the background from Jeffrey on
on the rules of War but Israel is seen
legally as the occupying power what does
that
mean uh this means that since
1967 Israel is a abided by uh several
obligations based on international law
and the law of occupation which uh one
of the most important and basic a
regulation of them is basically to
protect the civilians and to make
distinction between civilians and
combatants now in 2005 we all know that
Israel
disengaged from the Gaza Strip but it's
still a a
had an obligations based on IHL because
of the fact that it imposed uh severe
blockade since a few months after
castled in 2007 and until today so
Israel has obligations Israel is
obligated to to protect civilians uh it
is obligated to not to attack and not to
violate all the articles that is that
are included and anchored not only in
the Rome statute but also in the Geneva
conventions and in the heg regulation
which put the basically the obligation
on
Israel not only to not hurt civilians
but also not to uh uh attack
infrastructures that give services for
civilians such as electricity water fuel
and when you look at the history from
especially from the since the blockade
was imposed
until until now basically uh we see that
Israel has
controlled uh all these basic services
and humanit on a on a very humanitarian
minimum humanitarian level and even the
Israeli Supreme Court in petitions that
reached the Israeli Supreme Court to
Supply uh more uh electricity more fuel
to enable the freedom of movement in and
out from Gaza even to the West Bank and
not only in and out of Gaza a abroad we
saw that the intervention by the Supreme
Court was very very limited which also
itself said that despite the
disengagement Israel still have some
minimum obligations based on IHL which
let me bring in let me bring in Mark now
if you if you if you may um Mark you
have a different perspective on this you
were in 2009 you were in Gaza you a war
crimes investigator you're a former
military officer before we talk about
the specifics of what's happened in the
last 10 days how easy or difficult is
your work from a afar I would assume
that the fact we now have social media
we have so much more video and photo
evidence that helps you a great deal
well first let me just open by saying
that we had pxs for peace are concerned
with the civilian populations of both
Israel and Gaza whether those are
Israelis that are currently in Gaza as
captives or if they're Palestinians or
Israelis that are currently Under Fire
on either side of the Border indeed
social media has now become a part of
the conflict and conflicts as we've seen
not only in uh in the Israel Gaza
situation but also looking at things
such as Ukraine uh it one would think uh
would assist in would assist war crimes
investigators
but in fact the preponderance of
disinformation makes it very difficult
you know I look to Belling cat for
example which is an open- Source
investigating organization in the United
Kingdom and also air wars which is
another NGO there uh that does open-
Source investigations to try to
determine whether or not civilians have
been killed in conflicts and their work
has been greatly Complicated by this
preponderance of misinformation and
disinformation but let's make make it
very clear that both Hamas and Israel
have positive obligations under
international law the Geneva conventions
to protect civilians whether they are in
air strikes in the way that the air
strikes are planned and conducted or if
they are uh allowing Palestinians to
flee uh to protect the Palestinians on
the ground within Gaza these are
obligations under international law and
all parties are responsible for that
Jeff let me take you now to the specific
events of the last 10 days and first to
October the 7th a carefully planned
audacious attack by Hamas killed over
1,400 Israelis about 120 captives have
been taken to Gaza are these war crimes
yes clearly they are they are
obscene examples of war crimes of
killing civilians and capturing them and
holding them as hostage
this is an ongoing War crime and it
gives Israel a right of self-defense
to pursue them to capture them to put
them on trial uh but there are limits
obviously to that right in the time of
an eye for an eye a tooth for a tooth
that you find in the Bible is long gone
that seems to be
in part the Israeli reaction and it's a
wrong unethical reaction by so Jeffrey
when you when you when you when you hear
this Complete Siege blocking um all the
electricity and water although they're
allowing a little bit of water now back
to south of Gaza Fu F fuel food medicine
do you see that as collective punishment
and is collective punishment in itself
is that a war crime it is a war crime I
could give you the there is a section of
the Rome statute
which precisely defines uh what our
attempts at starvation at the end of the
day uh is the war crime and the cutting
off of crucial civilian supplies to keep
civilians alive is a war crime the
transporting of civilians outside the
country is also a war crime at little
noticed but it's there and it covers the
American supported attempt to put the
the a million or so gazans uh throw them
out of the country by the small aperture
in Egypt uh they that amounts to
transporting a civilian population
outside the state so uh yes there are a
number of crimes that are in Prospect
although it may be that America Mr
blinken and Egypt and others are
attempting to uh persuade the Israelis
not to pursue it so we haven't got to
the stage uh yet but we may in the next
couple of days of criminal Behavior by
way of starving uh the population or uh
extraa the population out of their
territory and in into the deserts of
Egypt which seems to be one of the plans
Mark um you are clearly watching what is
going on in terms of the military um
efforts by Israel you were there in
2009 this though is the deadliest Gaza
War so far in fact 6,000 bombs in six
days that's the last time the Israeli
military published a statistic that's
more than the number used by the US in
its entire battle in against isil in
raqa in Syria it's more used in six days
than the US used in Afghanistan in a
single year now does that give you the
view that this is probably a war crime
that they that they are just reigning
bombs on the civilian population well
look the uh obligation to protect
civilians in conflict is a clear one and
uh really the mark of a professional
military is its ability to protect
civilians while it is conducting
offensive operations and if the Israeli
Defense Forces believe that uh the laws
of armed conflict at International
humanitarian law is holding them back
from their offensive operations then
perhaps it shows that they do not uh
concern themselves as much with the
protection of civilians and the stopping
of Civilian harm than they should look I
I worked in the Pentagon during uh the
Iraq War in 2003 and participated in
many many dozens if not hundreds of air
strikes and you have to understand the
amount of work that goes into that into
planning identifying and validating your
target you once you have the target
identified you also have to conduct a
legal analysis the lawyers have to look
at each individual Target and determine
whether you can uh strike it with
distinction meaning that you're going to
hit a military object and not a civilian
object and also proportionally all right
so that the Damage Done whatever ever
that damage may be is not so widespread
that the civilian harm outweighs
whatever military gain that you're going
to get additionally militaries also
conduct what's called a collateral
damage estimation in which they try to
ascertain how many civilians are going
to be killed in each strike they do this
beforehand this is a maab calculus that
is all put together prior to each
individual strike now when we look at
the pace of operations in Gaza 6,000 air
strikes in six days that's a thousand a
day that is an incredibly High number of
strikes for such a tiny area in in fact
it's it's some you know somewhat akin to
what the US military was doing in Iraq
for the entire country during the Iraq
War in 2003 now we're talking about a
small postage damp so it does raise the
question and concerns of whether or not
the Israeli military is taking all
feasible precautions to protect
civilians in the air strikes and the air
strikes have continued saan and as
Jeffrey mentioned earlier on during this
they've asked the population of the
biggest Urban connation with in Gaza
although it is a Hu hugely densely
populated all all of the strip but the
Gaza City and the north 1.1 million
people initially in just 24 hours to
move I mean is this a war
crime I think that based on the
international uh and the IHL Norms it
clearly is amounted as a war crime
because the most two important things I
think this time uh with Israel's war on
on
Gaza rather than when we were examining
it in in the war during August 2014 are
two most important things first of all
the intent and the willingful of uh
Israel and what its intent is in terms
of the intention of what to destroy how
to destroy what kind of uh uh a commands
to give to civilians in Gaza where to
move and also the results the
massiveness of the killing of innocent
people like just take the number uh not
just about the 6,000 missile we are
talking about uh eight days or nine days
uh since October
with at least
2,700 being killed in Gaza while more
than 1,000 people who were women and
children and we saw the attack on
civilians when they were told to
evacuate uh a South southbound so and
when we see that there are at least 55
families that were killed in total all
the family members so the massiveness
and the intent and when we learn about
when when we read and hear the
intentions of Israeli officials of the
minister of defense on how they are
dealing these all of these are
indicators in examining uh uh that the
components of a war crime or even uh
genocide because uh these uh articles in
the Rome statute they are very clear
they have very clear components other
than examining the coll damage and
distinct distinction distinc thing
between civilians and and in combatants
uh the Willing fullness and the intent
are very much important to examine and
unfortunately the responses and the
statements from what we see and he
together with the result like even un
officials uh which I would like to refer
to like Mrs Franchesca alanz who is the
UN special repertoire on the occupied
territories said that the massive
killing of innocent is the thing that
should be
examined here to compare with the with
the with the with the people that were
killed or with the total number so far
2,700 while in more than one month or it
was 50 days the attack on a Gaza in or
operation on Gaza in August 2014 there
were
Jeffrey Jeffrey Jeffrey go on go on
Jeffrey the evid is clear that war
crimes have been committed we just see
the statistics the numbers we can see on
television children's bodies being
brought out there is no question that
war crimes are being committed if it's
genocide that's an open question
although there has to be genocidal
intent and that's difficult to prove uh
it could be that Israel will claim
that it is going into Gaza to release
those who are being held hostage or
Jeffrey disarm Jeff Jeffrey on this
evacuation order if you if I may just to
be clear in international law because I
think this is important if the Israeli
military is about to intervene the sick
the elderly the children those that
can't move Israel will say they gave
warning but it does it under
international law does Israel still have
an obligation to protect those
people it's not a defense in
international law to give warning what
you are doing is transporting or
ordering uh by way of backing up your
order with guns rockets and airplanes
you are forcing a civilian population
out of the country you are forcing them
first of all South and then through a
Bol that may be a humanitarian Corridor
if Mr blink succeeds or may not maybe
closed so there's no way but the force
is to leave your country and camp in the
desert as
refugees and that certainly uh is a war
crime and many children many people
who've got no connection with Hamas so
although Israel has the right of
self-defense that is not uh a right a
license to kill or do anything other
than conduct yourself with due regard to
humanitarian principles Mark Mark if I
could bring Mark in now as a war crimes
investigator when you hear 24 Health
Facilities including six hospitals
damaged at least 23 ambulances targeted
un sites 23 sites of the the UN agency
that deals with the Palestinians damaged
by air strikes are those things you'd be
investigating as well well absolutely
you know all of these issues I'd be
investigating to to to speak to the law
on uh the displacement of the population
and and giving effective warning article
57 of uh of of AP1 additional protocol
one of 1977 is fairly clear it says to
militaries that you should give you
should give warning if at all possible
the Israelis have have given warning
they've in fact given some fairly
specific warnings to the population the
question is are those realistic uh can
the population take them but but more
importantly even if Israel does provide
warning it does not then make it a free
fire zone right they still have to take
all the precautions that they would be
taking even had they not provided that
warning so it doesn't let me bring in
soan because we're coming to the end of
our our discussion and I do want to talk
about accountability because we've had
had already four previous Gaza Wars 2008
2009 2012 2014 2021 there were
allegations in of war crimes in all of
them and no one ever went to court did
they yeah that's correct and you know
sorry Mark this is for S this is for San
San go ahead please
sorry yeah well well we we human rights
organizations have since uh 2000 and
since castled calling for investigating
war crimes and we know all what happened
with the commission of inquiry LED back
then by Mr goldone Goldstone and but on
the other hand we know that Palestine uh
signed the Rome statute and gave the
entitlement to investigate only after uh
June 20 or sorry July 2014 so even if we
want to call for investigating war
crimes it should be by the
ICC investigated only of Acts that have
been conducted from that date and I
think that the development of
the recent recent from a year and a half
ago from the ICC that it does have
jurisdiction to investigate war crimes
in all Palestinian territory occupied
Palestinian territory
including the including East Jerusalem
then yes there should be a very clear
call to investigate these crimes I think
that with what we are seeing today a
time has come to act on opening on get
having a decision and opening war crimes
of the killing of innocent and
especially women and children saan thank
you very much thank you very much to all
of our panel today Jeffrey Robinson
salans are here and Mark Gasco hopefully
perhaps like me you're more informed
about the laws of war if you want to see
this program again it's available to
watch anytime on al.com if you got
comments about the Gaza war or our
coverage of it go to our Facebook page
that's facebook.com for/ AJ insidestory
or you can post I have to remind myself
they're no longer called tweets on X
find us at AJ insid story from me James
Bay and all the team here in Doha stay
safe and see you
soon